Hello, my name is Evgeny Lunyov. I am a candidate for Sociological Sciences and I consult a number of foreign and domestic companies,
including American Primetime Trading, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, domestic holding Temco Group, C. Bartles, German company Arpades Group, Moldovan company Universcom.
We are starting a course on information technology for a manager, which you can take on the MBS Start program.
This course is aimed at business processes managers, regardless of their position in the business management structure.
This course is suitable for managers, who have business processes as a typical function of marketing, logistics,
and for those managers, who have a strategic decision-making structure in the market uncertainty.
Unfortunately, there is no textbook or source of information, where you can get all the knowledge for IT for business or IT for a manager.
This is understandable, because the existing knowledge sector is a cross-section of three layers of knowledge, namely, knowledge about business,
management, marketing, management of personnel, business analytics, and so on.
The second layer is information science, information science is information technology, computing, programming, and so on.
The third layer is the humanities, sociology, psychology, economics, at least, in the part of mathematical patterns in the psychological behavior of people.
Therefore, the first lecture will be devoted to the general humanitarian vision of our society, how different groups of experts and specialists assess the society in which we live.
The next lecture will be devoted to the view of information technologies or computer science on the information system, in particular, on corporate systems.
These two lectures will help us understand the next four lectures, which are devoted to the view of business, both on society and on the information technology and systems as a whole.
The methodical course is designed to show the maximum integrity of the view of information technology and systems.
It consists of three-level analysis models.
First, we consider the social level, that is, the level of the state.
The second level is the level of the group or corporation.
And finally, the third level is the individual level or the level of the manager.
Why is this analysis system adopted?
Because at all levels we have the same situation, namely, the choice and decision-making.
So, the first lecture is the evolution of views on the society associated with information.
First, let's discuss the concept of the theories of the information society.
Let's talk about modern society.
Why has information become the driving force of this society?
Why do people think so?
What is hidden in the concept of information?
Why do many people consider information to be the main problem of modern society?
What is the common point of agreement of all scientists, experts, specialists, analysts?
We live in a world where the digital universe is expanding rapidly.
Our digital universe is becoming more and more saturated with information.
The most comprehensive example is the report of the Adies company in March 2007.
I would like to say a few words about this company,
because we will often refer to the results of this company's activities in the course.
Adies is the leading and most reliable supplier of reliable and important information,
helping customers understand the trends of the development of the electronic business
and developing reliable business management strategies.
The company has approximately 700 specialists in 43 countries around the world
and provides consultations on almost all levels and areas of the introduction of information technologies and systems.
The link to the company's website is provided in the textbook.
I recommend you to include it in the folder of your personal computers and laptops.
According to the Adies company, the total amount of all data recorded and re-recorded in 2006 was 161 exabytes of information.
In 2010, this figure will reach 988 exabytes.
Exabytes is a unit of information equal to approximately 2 to the 60th degree.
I just can't imagine what could correspond to this figure.
This is a very large figure.
So, until 2010, we have, in fact, a 57% annual growth in the volume of information.
Corporate information is slightly smaller in volume and in 2010 it will be only 30% of the total volume of information in the world.
Nevertheless, corporate information will be associated with 85% of all data in our digital universe.
This means that the importance and role of business will only grow.
Scientists and experts have divided the influence of the digital universe on public development into two equal groups.
The supporters of the first group say in interviews, newspapers, articles and books that we live in an electronic society,
that we are controlled by the knowledge economy or the virtual economy,
and that all progressive countries strive to enter the global information society.
The representatives of this group are Daniel Bale with his theory of post-industrialism,
which for several decades has been predicting very well how our society will develop.
Next, Jean Badiar and Marc Poster with the theory of post-modernism,
which is very popular, especially among young people,
that the signs around us are just an ocean, with which we are forced to interact.
We are surrounded by signs everywhere and we live and exist in them.
Marc Pajor and Charles Sable with their theory of flexible specialization have proven that we live in the post-Ford era,
that small enterprises can easily compete with large ones for a consumer and a client.
Manuel Castells and his theory of the information method of development,
with meritocracy and a network society, will predict information capitalism in all its diversity.
The second group of scientists and experts believes that everything that is happening is just the informationization of established relations.
The information has really grown and has some significant value,
but still the main feature of our society, according to the scientists of the second group,
is the continuity with respect to the past.
The supporters of the second group are Herbert Schiller with his theory of neo-Marxism,
Alain Lippitz with his theory of regulation, Anthony Giddens with his theory of reflexive modernization,
and Jürgen Habermas with his theory of the public sphere.
All of them say that the public sphere, namely museums and libraries,
is declining because the value of information is declining.
The theory of regulation and neo-Marxism tells us that capitalism has been and still is,
and the fact is that a person or a group of people needs more rigid information support and information control.
Everything else remains unchanged.
Many people ask themselves what is happening now and what will happen in the future.
This is understandable, because we constantly face a situation of choice.
Is it a family that chooses the path of its child's future, that is, a profession,
or is it a corporation that introduces some kind of information system,
or is it some kind of state level that faces problems with the introduction of the electronic government
or elements of the electronic government into practice.
We will not tell you which of these groups of our scientists is on the right or left.
I will send you the books of Frank Webster, the theory of the information society,
in which all these theories are described in detail.
Nevertheless, when meeting these people with their names in articles, interviews,
I draw your attention to the fact that you should not miss them.
These are really the titans of our social thought, which sees a little further than ordinary people.
We will only focus on the analysis of the general features of modern society
and will translate the arguments for and against from both groups of experts
so that each of you can decide for yourself in which society we live in and which society is closer to your understanding.
But before that, let's first emphasize the importance of the influence of information on the work of a manager.
So, the importance of the phenomenon of information for a manager.
Let's turn to the data of the company Adies.
According to its research, in American companies, employees working with information
spend about 14.5 hours a week reading and writing e-mails,
13.3 hours on compiling documents,
9.6 hours on searching for information and 9.5 hours on its analysis.
If we take the level of a corporation, in which about a thousand people work,
and they are connected with information,
then the reformatting of data and transferring data from one program to another
takes or the company loses about 5.7 million dollars.
And the costs of unsuccessful data and information search are still 5.3 million dollars per year.
This is a colossal amount for the company.
But not only the minimization of losses and costs when working with information is important for the manager.
The work of a manager is, in fact, informational in its nature
and is aimed at managing corporations, personnel, technologies.
This includes both management itself and marketing,
that is, management and development of products or services, as well as the market of sales.
Targeting, targeted marketing or management,
is also important, aimed at conquering new markets of sales,
to achieve any significant indicators for the economy and business.
Therefore, we come to a very important conclusion.
Namely, information flows are not only a possible threat to the manager's activities,
but also bring potential opportunities for his successful work.
Therefore, the task is to learn to navigate in the ocean of your information environment
and extract valuable information, which will be the most competitive advantage for you as a manager.
Let's look at the features and criteria of the information society.
They are all related to the identification of the parameter of novelty.
What new information has our society brought?
Its quantitative growth.
Usually, there are four significant criteria of the information society.
Namely, the innovation and technological criteria,
the second is the economic criteria,
the third is the cultural criteria,
and the fourth is related to the field of employment.
Let's take a closer look at each of these criteria.
Since the 1970s, new technologies have become one of the most noticeable advances of the new times.
Well, really.
Satellite, cable television, Internet, computer networks, DVD, CD, and so on.
Therefore, the leading futurologist Alvin Toffler
in 1980 introduced a memorable metaphor.
Namely, the world is gradually being formed under three waves of technological innovations.
The first was the agricultural revolution,
approximately in the Middle Ages.
Then the second wave was the industrial revolution,
which is already closer to us.
And the third wave, which is now coming,
or which has already entered our shores,
is the information revolution.
Later, his futuristic prognosis was supported by the possibility of computer technologies
to transform telecommunications,
that is, to combine two technologies, computer and communication,
which made it possible to introduce information networks,
online, web, Internet, and so on.
At the moment, the distribution of digital communication technologies,
such as e-mail, data transfer, texts,
and information exchange in online mode
is the reason for the formation of a new network society.
Therefore, the question is logical.
Why not consider the avalanche of information and communication technologies
as a sign of the emergence of a new society?
Since we did it, for example, with the industrial society.
The steam boiler, electricity,
all this was a sign of the industrial revolution,
and the information and communication technologies are the signs of the information society.
However, two facts are worth mentioning here,
which I have highlighted separately.
The first fact is that none of the 19th and 20th century fantasists
could predict the advent of the Internet era.
Well, the most complete approach to them, in my opinion,
was Stanislav Lem.
This is a Polish writer, satirist, philosopher, and fantasist,
who lived from 1921 to 2006.
In his book Solaris, published in 1961,
and in Russian in 1963,
he described our communication with artificial intelligence
or with the low-Earth civilization.
But he did not approach the understanding of the Internet
and the development of information and communication technologies
that we have at the moment.
The question is why the disillusioned fantasy of many authors and fantasists
could not describe the advent of the era of information and telecommunication technologies.
The second fact is that before the appearance of the metaphor
and the works of the leading futurologist Elvin Toffler
and his numerous successors,
on April 19, 1965,
the Electronic Magazine published an article by the young chemist Gordon Moore.
He analyzed the development of the microelectronics industry at that time
and wrote a short phrase that
the number of elements of microchips of the minimum value
doubles every 12 months at an unchanged price.
Subsequently, when Gordon Moore became the head of Intel,
and, as you know, this global company owns, in fact,
80% of all PCs,
that is, the personnel of computers,
is one of the leading in this area in the world,
this law was transformed into the following.
The computing power of microprocessors and the density of memory microchips
doubles every two years at an unchanged price.
After a while, the Intel Corporation introduced a new law
on behalf of another inventor,
namely, Robert Merkel,
who is the father of the Ethernet network protocol.
The law states that the value of the entire network
grows approximately as a square of its number of components.
This law was also adopted.
The thoughts about the network effect,
network markets, network marketing,
and even the idea of society as not from citizens,
but as from networks, began to be formed.
I want to illustrate the Metcalfe law on a slide.
This slide shows an illustration of the Metcalfe law,
where the number of network members is 4.
This gives approximately 12 connections.
That is, if two network members are a two-dimensional connection,
three is already 6,
four is 12,
five members is already 20,
and so on.
Meanwhile, the laws of Moore and Metcalfe
do not have a social basis.
Blind research can lead to sad consequences.
In fact, there was a dispute here,
and society was subjected to
such a great influence of technocratic ideas,
which came from the Intel company,
and which were picked up by many humanitarians,
and from which these theories later emerged.
And this general boom,
when technologies began to prevail over the social context,
and influenced the fact that,
for example, the blind research of the Metcalfe law
was felt by investors and people
who invested in the Internet of Technologies in 2000.
It was the collapse of the Dotcom boom in 2000
that blind research was attributed to the Metcalfe law,
that networks are capable of generating new value on their own.
The Moore law is still old,
it has been in operation for 40 years,
and will probably remain unchanged,
at least according to the estimates of its creator,
for 15 years.
But in order to clearly define our society as information,
we need to give certain answers to the questions.
What are they?
Namely, when does the network become a network?
Why, when the telephone and telegraph were invented,
no one thought of calling our society information,
and in fact, it is also a network?
How many information and communication technologies are needed
to qualify our society as information?
If we put technology,
and not the social context itself,
the social interaction of people,
we can come to such societies as,
for example, the widespread distribution of bio-additives,
which can allow us to call our society a bio-additive society,
automobile, the widespread development of the automobile society,
a car society, and so on.
What is this related to?
This is the attitude to information and communication technologies.
This is due to the fact that for the 50s, 70s and 80s,
investments in the information industry
or in information technology
were comparable to the gigantic investments in the military business,
that is, with military expenses.
As you know, humanity has already reached a level
that can destroy itself tens of thousands of times.
The question is, who needs it?
Why did we develop to such a state?
In fact, the same can be said about information technologies,
when money was spent only there.
We have a subjective nature to make decisions.
If we take into account that many medical problems
are not solved by humanity yet,
we can understand that some common sense
in the distribution of expenses between military,
information and communication, and medical,
we need to correct.
I mean, I come to the conclusion
that the separate leading role of information and communication technologies
in social changes is very dubious.
The second economic criterion
is related to the fact that the share of the information business
in the national product has increased.
Also, due to the effectiveness and activity
of information circulation in the economic sphere,
it gives more effect in money
compared to industry or agriculture.
Another argument is that many countries
such as the USA, Japan, and Europe
have become information societies,
since the main place in their economies
is the activity of the production of information products
and information services.
However, despite the increasing role of information,
we should consider arguments against it.
The first argument is that it is not clear
what criteria are used in the statistical table
for different categories of human activity.
If we define this work as informational,
why did it get there?
How can we divide the work of a call center operator
and an innovator manager,
who belongs to the same industrial enterprise?
Where will we put them?
In the information statistical table or in the industrial one?
The next argument is that in the historical perspective,
according to the Moore's law,
the cost of information services and products
is constantly falling in the world.
While we are now observing that the prices
of industrial resources and agricultural products
are constantly rising.
Moreover, the so-called information countries,
this will be the third argument against,
which are the leaders in the information sphere,
at the same time,
they are also the most resource-consuming.
More than half of the resources on the planet Earth
are consumed by these so-called information countries.
The fourth criterion, which I highlight,
is that despite the unprecedented growth
of advertising and television in the economy,
nevertheless, the economic efficiency
of these phenomena is more than dubious.
Indeed, the yellow press, in fact,
has flooded all our kiosks and counters.
Nevertheless, what information value,
that is, they carry some information load,
but the economic value is very dubious.
Therefore, the key answer to the question
about the growing role of economic information
and other information products
should be, first of all,
the answer to the question of what society
we want to build, form or create.
If we want to create a society
that will consume only information products,
and access to valuable things,
such as oil and gas,
will be closed to the main members of society
and will be offered only to the chosen ones,
then it will be very beneficial
to call our society informational.
In fact, here you create your information products,
here you have a show, cartoons,
please consume them,
but do not pay attention to the resources,
the real resources that are valuable.
The fourth argument against this
is the fact that despite the unprecedented growth,
the unprecedented growth of advertising
and television in the economy,
which should be a sign of an informational society,
in general, is a dubious economic purpose and role.
Therefore, I draw to the intermediate conclusion
that the key answer to the question
about the growing role of economic information
and other information products
should be the answer to the question
what kind of society we want to build,
form and create.
If we want to create a society
where there will be an economic price tag
for each product and service
for which we have to pay
and there will be nothing free,
as it was in our past societies,
then this society will be a good example
for some, especially economists,
and those who have access
to the real sources of income of the country,
it will be beneficial for them
to call our society informational.
However, a lot, especially in terms of social,
especially for those categories of people
who are involved only in public life
or who leave it, that is, the older generation,
will not be able to do it for free.
Therefore, the growing role of economic purpose
or economic role of information products
is not quite the right goal
of the development of society.
A lot in our society should be done
in the non-economic sphere,
outside the access of economists
to the fact that they put price tags
on information products and services.
The next criterion is a cultural criterion.
Each of us knows that the circulation of information
in social life has increased enormously.
In fact, we live in such a media society
in which neither our fathers nor our grandfathers lived.
However, despite the increasing amount of information
in the cultural sphere,
we still have a lot of information
and we have a paradox.
The paradox is that the information explosion
led to the dissolution of meaning.
Jean Baudillard,
one of the founders of postmodernism,
wrote well about this.
In 1983, he wrote
that the amount of information is increasing,
but the meaning is decreasing.
We live among these simulacra.
Simula is a Latin word for pretending,
pretending or a copy,
that is, an original.
In fact, from the point of view of postmodernists,
I am advertising my image.
In this case, it is an image of a tutor
on the MBS Start program.
We are surrounded by these simulacra.
There is nothing real around us.
These are idealized,
sign products of culture
that have lost their connection
with real objects.
This is what a simulacra is in the usual sense.
It is the creative specialists
who have self-reflection,
self-awareness and are very productive
and create this culture of copies,
easily distort,
interpret and break their original meaning.
This is why it is so popular
on television
or in the corporate environment
various shows, kitsch, analogies.
But we must remember one thing.
Whatever society we live in,
it lives on its moral and ethical principles
that have nothing to do with information.
Remember them.
Namely,
you live for yourself and let others live.
All people are created equal.
This is my country,
whether it is right or not, and so on.
What did the century of information give us?
Time is money.
Who owns information, owns the world.
I think that we can hardly build a normal society
on these principles.
The next criterion is related to the occupation.
This is the last criterion
that we will consider as a sign of an information society.
It is related to the structure of the population's occupation
and the models of changes observed.
It is known that in Western Europe, Japan, North America
more than 70% of the workforce
is engaged in the service sector.
So, the so-called white-collar work prevails.
It will be a little more difficult
to deal with this criterion
than with the innovation and technology.
Because here not some technology
affects the brain,
but the information is promoted in the brain.
How is it produced in the field of occupation
and how is it realized through education and experience.
It is believed that the driving force of the modern economy
will be people whose main ability
is to use information.
It will be system analysts,
niche finders, designers, experts, and so on.
The common sense remains constant.
The main drivers in the economy are those
whose work requires the creation and use of information.
Therefore, it is quite logical
that a coal miner is an industrialist,
and an expert is already a member of the information society.
So, in order to consider the criteria
related to the super-capacity,
we will analyze a small business case.
In September 2006,
a case was handled
with the state corporation Comcor.
The fact is that this corporation
created a call center in Tula
for 600 agency places,
the largest in Russia.
In Moscow, where the minimum wage of operators
is 15-20 thousand rubles,
and the minimum wage of a licensed agent
is 40 thousand rubles,
it is not profitable for businessmen
to pay such salaries.
In addition, the current situation is high.
People work for half a year and leave.
The company Comcor and its director Grishin
chose Tula as the least
outsourced by the region.
The company offered them
from 8 to 12 thousand rubles
for those who initially
became operators,
and for advanced operators
from 16 thousand rubles.
This is very profitable
for both Tula and Comcor owners.
The company offered
from 8 to 12 thousand rubles
for those who initially
became operators,
and for advanced operators
from 16 thousand rubles.
By the end of 2007,
they planned to complete
all the workplaces,
that is, to hire 1,500 operators.
But they hired 1,500 new information workers
who came from non-information spheres.
The average salary of 12-16 thousand rubles per month
is unlikely to allow them
to significantly change their lifestyle
and join the world of the chosen ones,
that is, specialists of high technologies.
This is understandable.
In Russia, there is a double inflation
All the management decisions
that were made
to transfer business from Moscow to Tula
have remained unchanged
since the pre-information era.
More is done, less is done.
Moreover, it could be assumed
that if the work in the call center
would allow operators
to grow to the level of the director,
then we would have some information society
because the director can allow himself
to change his laptop for a year or two,
have access to high-value knowledge,
how to organize a project, etc.
But the fact is that the harmonious
functioning of society itself
does not imply the increase of people
in the position of the director.
Not everyone should be a director.
That is why we have the fact
that the work of operators
is routine in relation to the work of the director.
The same can be said about programmers
and computer scientists.
These professions are a symbol
of our information age.
But we have a phenomenon of computer crime
among programmers and computer scientists.
This is a proof that the knowledge
that was ingrained in their heads
did not affect their motives.
We all know the hacking,
the theft of business cards,
the theft of credit cards, etc.
All this is done by programmers
who have acquired some information knowledge.
Their motives and actions
have remained unchanged.
Moreover, we can say that despite the increase
in the number of programmers and computer scientists,
there has been no less increase
in the number of social workers.
And their work, although it is more noble,
is paid less in society.
They use less information
and less information products
than programmers and computer scientists.
In any case, we need to analyze
the information work of a particular worker
and determine the quality of his work,
which will allow him to occupy
a certain niche in the hierarchy of society.
We also need to determine the responsibility
of the information society.
Only then can we understand
whether the criteria of information occupation
can be a sign of an information society.
Today, it can be said that society
is already pointless to divide
into workers, collective farmers or intelligentsia.
Moreover, even such high-status groups
of people as owners or entrepreneurs
are becoming a driving force of our society.
In many countries, including our country,
the driving force has already become professionals,
that is, elite groups of people,
the basis of their activities is service,
that is, service of a certain area of activity.
Further, certification,
the presence of some status documents,
the portfolio of some implemented projects
and the ability to achieve some goals,
in particular business goals.
We see that none of the criteria
of information, technological,
economic, cultural or occupation
can be considered as full-fledged concepts
by which we can determine our society
and its activities.
We need to understand
that the increase in the amount of information
cannot mean that we are moving
into a high-quality society.
Therefore, we must answer the question
whether the information that surrounds me
is useful,
what can it give me in the future,
whether it is a threat to me.
We need to understand
that information is not structured
by the power of the information.
At the same time,
the information that we can structure,
manage, analyze,
becomes less and less
in the weight of the general information.
This is the threat
that information brings us.
We can recall the fathers of the theory of information,
namely Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver,
who in 1949 gave the definition of information
as the quantitative estimate of the probability
of the frequency of the appearance of symbols
associated with the concept of a bit,
that is, a binary signal that takes values 0 and 1.
Unfortunately, such a definition of information
is useful for engineers in communications,
but it is not useful for us
to understand the meaning and value of information.
Information, in fact, exists
as space and time exist,
as commodity-money relations or equivalent relations,
and other relations.
We can express ourselves more clearly.
Information is a condition of existence.
But what?
We are surrounded by different objects of reality
that we reflect in the senses,
calculate, model,
that is, we transform them into some data.
Data in Latin is a calculation.
In fact, it is an idealized representation
of the environment or reality
in some formalized form,
suitable for transmission and processing
Idealization occurs through some language
consisting of some signs,
their structures, their relations, etc.
All this is called a syntax of the language,
that is, a syntax of the Greek component.
These data that we receive
and transform into the senses
can be combined into metadata
that explains other data
and can be used to create a semantic
that is derived from the Greek word
meaning.
Semantic is a connection between
the syntax signs and objects of reality
that these signs describe and reflect.
The interaction process itself,
when either reflection or data exchange occurs,
is called communication.
If we perform some operations on data,
for example, assign some value to some data,
it will mean connecting them with other data
and they already become some indicators
or attributes,
that is, significant characteristics
of the properties of the object
that we can measure, understand,
highlight, study.
There is a very significant point here,
which is the basis for understanding
the subsequent development of the forms of information.
It is necessary to understand that
the indicators of the attributes,
both the indicators themselves and the operations
above them, are just a portion of information
that we can judge
about the essence of the object and its semantics,
that is, about its meaning.
The data itself or the attribute
and what we do above it,
some operation,
is just a portion of information.
This slide, in fact,
shows the scale of the growth of the value of information.
The basis, as we said,
is the data or metadata.
The difference between information and data
can be likened to iron ore and ore.
When we extract iron from iron ore
using some operations,
it is already some kind of benefit,
and iron ore in itself is of no value.
Information is, in fact,
what answers the questions
what, who, where, when and how.
The first question is philosophical,
and we put it aside.
We will call information everything
and those transformations over data
that answer these questions.
Hence, indicators and attributes
as a substantial set of information
or a portion of information
can serve and perform functions
to identify objects,
to determine their structure, static,
development dynamics and other characteristics.
Of course, we can put any set of indicators
in accordance with the number or the duration of the text.
This will be its values,
which may also make some practical sense.
As an example, you have already studied
the so-called key indicators of efficiency,
any KPI is an indicator,
but not all indicators can be a KPI.
For example, the number of listeners
who listened to this IT course for a manager
is an indicator, but it is not an indicator of KPI.
But the number of students who listened
to this video course and bought DVD
can be a KPI,
that is, a key indicator,
at least for the evaluation of the demand
of this video course by business school methodologists.
That is, when we added some more information
to the simple indicator,
we turned it from a simple indicator
into a KPI indicator.
It is important to clarify that the set of indicators
can be alienated from the source of their data
and from the object to which they are assigned.
They can be stored in certain formats and specifications
and have their own history of values,
structures and sources.
Further transformation of data into indicators
is the third step of our pyramid.
We can continue in the same way with metadata.
That is, we can talk about the presence of some kind of
meta-information that is based on metadata
and can explain them.
But we must define knowledge
in the order of the value scale of the quality of information.
That is, in this pyramid, in this structure.
Therefore, we limit ourselves to defining
the knowledge that defines it
as a portion of information
explaining how a particular event,
a fact, a property of an object and so on happened.
And we define it as a portion of information
explaining how a particular event, a fact,
a property of an object and so on happened.
This will help us analyze the values of data
separate from the object and contained in the database.
The most common form of describing values
is a document.
From the Latin documentum,
an example, evidence, evidence.
This is a kind of materialized reflection
of the data and information.
A document can be presented as a result of
converting data and information into significant
and semantic knowledge.
That is, as a rule, the usual documents
that we have in business are on the third
and third scale of the pyramid.
If we climb higher in the value scale of the quality of information,
then from the metadata that explains
the value of the information,
we will move on to the understanding or competence.
From the Latin word,
it means I am trying to achieve, I am corresponding, I am approaching.
Usually, the competence is associated with the ability of specialists
to solve a certain class of professional tasks.
But the essential point of defining competence
is the understanding of knowledge.
That is, an explanatory answer to the question
why it happened.
To solve professional tasks,
you do not always have enough knowledge.
Therefore, you have to attract knowledge from other specialists.
Consequently, competence includes
both the knowledge that the specialist has
and the other knowledge that he can attract,
for example, from the consultant.
Knowledge about where the other knowledge is
that can be attracted to solve a particular task
and is the basis of the concept of competence.
And finally, we have come to the peak of the value scale of the quality of information.
Again, I draw your attention to the slide.
This is a combination of knowledge and competence,
which is called the experience of the best practices.
This type of information is associated with the value of the results
and the achievement of the ultimate goal.
Many people associate almost all of this with the value of the knowledge.
Many people associate the experience with competence
and the previous stages of the hierarchy, that is, with knowledge and information.
However, this information, knowledge and competence
contribute only to the efficiency
of the use of means to achieve the goal.
But what is the goal itself?
What is the value of the result in the goal?
And how effective is it achieved?
That is, the effectiveness of the goal
is determined only by the experience of the best practices.
For example, we all know that medicine treats sick people.
It is necessary to treat them.
And it does this very effectively
with the help of information technologies.
But in fact, the Ministry of Health
and the medical institutions that surround us
are not the only ones who are doing this.
The Ministry of Health is the only one
that should treat not sick people,
but those who are healthy.
That is, their knowledge and competence
should be directed to the effective treatment of diseases and sick people,
instead of their practice
and knowledge
being directed to the maintenance of health of healthy people.
Here we have
that we have, in fact,
all medicine,
its goal is the wrong one.
So, we have come to a very important point.
To the phenomenon
that can really determine
something new in our society
compared to other historical periods of development.
In other words,
we see that on the upper levels of values
there is knowledge, competence and the best practice.
These are, in fact, the derivative concepts of information
of the global universe of our digital universe.
They are generalized and transferred to some carriers
and can represent the so-called phenomenon
of theoretical knowledge
that has really changed the image of our life.
In fact,
the thing is that if you want to be successful,
you have to study all your life.
This has not happened in any of our previous periods of development.
That is, once knowledge was passed on
in an old way from father to son
or there was enough, for example,
the completion of one educational institution for the rest of your life.
Today, in fact,
it is no longer a metaphor of words that business is based on knowledge.
Today, the core of intellectual capital
is knowledge, competence and the best practice.
They should be considered as a complex management object,
as a strategic resource of any company
that should be at every employee
with the necessary quality,
in the required quantity,
in the right place, at the set time
and, preferably, at some acceptable price.
As has already been noted above,
the knowledge of the business is the area
that is the intersection of three main areas.
That is, interdisciplinary knowledge in information technologies
and information systems is conditioned by the sciences of business management,
the sciences of information
and the humanities.
We will refer to the report of the company KPMG,
which examined the practices of knowledge management
in 400 companies in the United States and Europe
and determined the situation with the analysis of these practices,
at what level are these or those companies.
The method is very simple.
It assigned one to those companies
with a low level of maturity
and assigned five to those companies
that solve their business tasks
using knowledge management tasks.
According to the data of this company KPMG
and their research,
at the first level, that is,
at the lowest level of maturity,
there are 43 companies in the United States and Europe,
at the second and third levels there are 32% of companies,
at the fourth level there are only 10%
and at the highest, fifth level of maturity,
there are 1% of companies.
If we take our Russian reality,
it will be even more depressing.
Therefore, the practical work number 1 will be considered below
and you will be offered
a methodology of assessing a company or enterprise
on the development of a knowledge management system.
We suggest you find out the level of development
of your enterprise or company.
Let's summarize the first lecture.
There is an overwhelmingly technocratic point of view
on the level of knowledge management,
as well as on the corporate level,
and on the all-inclusive number of modern information flows,
which, unfortunately, does not allow to evaluate the role
of information in modern society.
The most productive point of view is that
we live in the era of the same relations
as our fathers and grandfathers lived.
That is, our society is characterized by continuity of relations
and the development of the new generation of information capitalism.
The characteristic feature that distinguishes our society
from the previous generations is the growth of the significance
of theoretical knowledge,
that is, the knowledge, competences,
and best practices that can be generalized,
encoded and distributed.
In addition to our course,
all subsequent considerations of information technologies
such as ERP, ERM, BMP
are a variety of theoretical knowledge
expressed in concepts, approaches,
methods, technologies, etc.
It is important for the manager to understand this language of IT specialists.
To do this, we will need to prepare the concept of IT
or IT system,
since we did it with the concept of information.
What is the concept of IT?
What is the value of IT and IT system?
The main conclusion of the course is that
we will be able to master information
and gain theoretical knowledge
and achieve the goals of survival in the business world
in particular, in each case.
It is necessary to remember the Darwinian saying
that the smartest and the most efficient
are the ones who survive.
The smartest and the most efficient are the ones
who adapt to the environment.
Lecture 2. Structure, Composition and Classification of IT and IT systems
First, let's consider the concept of IT and IT systems.
The concept of IT is usually associated with operations on data and information,
such as storage, processing, transfer or exchange of data or information.
The concept of IT is usually associated with the final set of hardware and software complexes
and various resources that serve certain informational and management purposes.
The slide shows the IT as a process of data and information transfer.
So, we have the structure of IT,
which at a certain level is split into information processes.
At another level, the information process is distributed
according to information procedures,
which in turn are divided according to information operations.
Here, in fact, the model of the detailing of the process of data transfer is depicted.
This is the most general and formal model
that allows to describe the processes of obtaining, displaying,
accumulating, processing, transfer of data and information,
as well as the procedures and operations of collection, preparation,
formatting, archiving, search, conversion, logical conclusion,
commutation, exchange, generation, and so on.
The data movement can be organized both horizontally and vertically.
In fact, everything depends on a specific business process and a given task.
But the most typical data movement in an IT system is the movement along the contour.
For example, the financial director collects reports from his departments,
groups them, submits them to the management,
considers all these reports, makes some instructions,
sends them to the financial director,
the financial director distributes them again to his departments.
And so, in this cycle, the business process takes place.
This is called the financial information contour.
There are three levels of description of IT.
This is the conceptual or content level,
where the content of the subject area structure is described,
in the area where IT operates.
Next is the logical level of description,
where the formalization of the model of the subject area is carried out.
And finally, the physical level of description,
which determines the way of implementing the IT model
obtained at the conceptual and logical level in a technical device or devices.
The concept of an IT system for the purpose of management
is a combination of functional structures of information,
mathematical, technical, organizational, personnel,
which are united into a single system for the purpose of collecting,
storing, processing and issuing the necessary information
for the implementation of the functions of management.
In fact, the IT system, unlike IT technologies,
forms a variety of information flows.
What are they?
The information flow from the external environment to the management system.
For example, there can be a flow of legislative and normative information
created by the state institutions in the part of the legislation.
And also a flow of information about the market structure
created by competitors, consumers, suppliers.
That is, this is one flow that goes from the outside into the management system.
Further, the information flow from the management system to the external environment.
That is, some kind of accounting information in the same state institutions,
tax inspections and other marketing information.
Further, we have an information flow from the management system to the management object itself,
which is a set of some kind of planned, normative,
administrative documents and information for the implementation of some kind of economic or business processes.
We also have a reverse flow from the object to the management system,
which also reflects some kind of accounting information
about the state of the object of management by the economic system.
That is, the presence of raw materials, money, energy, labor resources,
ready-made products, some services, and so on.
In fact, the information system accumulates, processes the incoming accounting information,
converts or acts on the basis of some kind of normatives and plans,
on the basis of some kind of analytical information,
which serves as a basis for forecasting the development of the economic system itself,
for the adjustment of its goals, for the creation of plans for a new cycle of reproduction,
and, in fact, for the development strategies in the conditions of some kind of market.
In fact, when we talk about information technology,
we mean that it is based on some subsystems or systems.
When we talk about the system, we, in fact, mean the basis of some kind of information technologies
on which the system is based.
That is, there is a kind of interpenetration of these concepts.
This is due to the nature of the information itself.
If you remember, we said that the indicator and the operation above it are, in fact, pieces of information.
That is, they are the same.
Here we can apply the same analogy.
This remark is in relation to the system, the system as an indicator, and the technology as an operation.
That is, the information flows circulating in some system are processed by technologies,
which, in turn, consist of some subsystems of information processing.
That is, there is also an interpenetration of the system in technology, and so on.
So, let's consider the conceptual, that is, the substantive level of the description of IT technology.
The conceptual model of information technology consists of processes of obtaining,
displaying, accumulating, processing, exchanging and forming knowledge and information.
The dotted lines on the slide limit semantic information from data,
which is described by syntax.
That is, in fact, in the center, where the data are, we have a syntax.
The information we are working with in the process of obtaining, that is, collection, preparation,
verification, well, maybe before inputting, all this has some semantic meaning.
That is, it can answer the question of who, what, how, how much and where from.
So, when we convert information into data, here, in fact, the syntax is in charge.
Further, when we extract from the data, again, we get information in the display systems,
which can also have a semantic meaning and answer the questions of who, what, how.
And already from the display or from the help of some other means of information systems,
information technology, we can form knowledge that answers the question of how.
We got one or another indicator, one or another property of the object and so on.
The conceptual model of any technology should contain, in fact, information description of the subject area,
in which business processes work.
Therefore, in this scheme, we have highlighted layers of information technologies, processes, procedures and operations.
Let's repeat again.
In the vertical curved line on the left, on the slide, processes and procedures are separated,
working with information streams, in which some semantic meaning prevails.
That is, information is converted into data.
Or vice versa.
In the center, working with data, the system of procedures and operations.
And on the right, we again have information and knowledge, in which again the semantic aspect of information prevails.
If we consistently build a chain consisting of processes and procedures,
then we will get a description of the process of information conversion to some final information product,
which can be some kind of documented management solution.
That is, the initial process is the process of obtaining,
and it begins with the collection procedure, displaying the subject area,
for example, parameters, characteristics, the state of the control object.
Further, the collected information must be prepared in the appropriate way,
that is, it must be analyzed, structured, checked for completeness, reliability, integrity, and so on.
After the preparation and verification stages,
the information can be transmitted via communication channels in some traditional ways,
such as telephone, courier, mail, telegraph, or with the help of information and communication technologies,
for the purpose of conversion, or, perhaps, the conversion algorithm can be immediately turned into data,
in the process of, so-called, information input.
This stage converts information into data in the form of digital codes,
with the help of which this stage of input converts information into data in the form of digital codes,
with the help of some specific physical phenomena.
It is important to note that at these stages of the formation of information procedures,
we usually deal with information that we can comprehend.
After the input, we already deal with data that can be processed,
that is, converted, accumulated, or exchanged.
The data processing process is associated with the main algorithms and computer calculations procedures.
The exchange involves the transfer of data between all the processes that it is associated with at the level of data.
The exchange also allows the transfer of data between users,
is used in the process of obtaining and displaying information,
and also contributes to the process of accumulation of information coming from different sources.
The main procedures of the exchange are the procedures of switching, routing, and transfer of data,
which involves the presence of such operations as coding, decoding, modulation, demodulation,
coordination, and signal amplification, and so on.
The accumulation also allows you to convert data and store it for a long time,
periodically updating, as well as extracting it in the right amount at the request of users.
The accumulation usually involves the procedures of archiving, updating, searching, and updating data.
The last operation is updating, adding other data to the data,
correcting old data, or destroying it.
Next, we have the display.
This procedure contains such procedures as converting data into a form that is convenient for perception,
either in sound, text, or image, and so on.
The process of knowledge formation usually involves human activity.
In fact, we are dealing with the product of human thinking.
However, so-called expert systems are being created,
which allow or help or prompt a person
how to form knowledge without consulting the services of specialists.
Based on their algorithms,
they can form and display certain types of knowledge.
In fact, IT technology can help solve difficult-to-formalize tasks
by automatizing the process of presenting knowledge.
This is clearly shown in expert systems.
The logical level of IT systems is a complex of interconnected models
that formalize IT processes when data is transformed.
This is also shown on the slide.
It is also divided into a model of information display,
a model of data exchange, data processing, data accumulation,
a model of data acquisition, and a model of knowledge presentation.
Formalization in the form of models allows to connect the parameters of IT processes
and allows to implement IT processes and procedures.
The logical model of IT reflects the scheme of interconnection of IT processes.
When processing data, all the main information processes are formed.
Processing, exchange, accumulation of data, and knowledge presentation.
What is the data processing model?
The first is a formalized description of the processes of the organization of the processing.
In fact, it is what we have to do with operating systems.
The second is the transformation procedures,
algorithms, programs, sorting, search, creation, update of some static or dynamic structures.
And the third is the procedures of logical inference or modeling.
The data exchange model contains a formal description of the procedures of the computing network,
that is, transfer, encoding, modulation in the channels of communication,
commutation and routing from the protocol of the network exchange.
The data collection model is usually described using international standards,
OSI, that is, in the interaction of open systems or local networks,
as well as the specifications of the Internet network.
The data accumulation model describes the system of data database management,
as well as the information database itself,
which can be defined as a database or a database of knowledge.
The process of transition from the sensual, that is, information presentation to the physical,
is carried out by a three-level information database model system.
That is, from the conceptual one, which in what volume of information should be accumulated
when implementing information technology,
logical, that is, the structure, self-connection of elements and information,
and physical, that is, methods of data placement, access to them on machine carriers.
Next, let's consider the knowledge presentation model,
which is chosen depending on the completeness, reproduction and content of the target area,
as well as the types of solvable tasks.
At present, such knowledge presentation models are used as logical, algorithmic, semantic,
frame, integral.
The data collection model is built on the basis of standards
that recommend the structure of data and documents, as well as the data formats.
Finally, the information display model is built on the basis of various machine graphics formats
and any other user graphical interface.
In fact, this is an interface model,
that is, how we interact with other parts of information technology, information systems.
Since the basic information processes operate with information, data and knowledge,
the management takes place through the processes of obtaining,
collection, preparation, input and display,
construction of graphics, text, video, synthesis of speech.
Data management is carried out through the processing process,
that is, in fact, the management of the organization of processing processes and transformation of information,
as well as through the process of exchange,
routing and accumulation, that is, systems and databases.
Knowledge management is carried out through the system of management, obtaining and generating knowledge.
Next, let's consider the physical level of information technology description.
At the physical level, the description of information technology and systems
is a software implementation.
That is, the sub-system includes the sub-system of obtaining and displaying information and presenting knowledge,
the sub-system of processing, the sub-system of data management and knowledge,
the sub-system of data accumulation and the sub-system of data exchange.
The slides show how the user and the developer work.
At the physical level, IT technologies are considered as a system consisting of large subsystems.
Processing, exchange, data accumulation, obtaining and displaying information,
presenting knowledge and data management and knowledge.
Let's take a closer look at what the data processing subsystems are.
They are built on the basis of different classes of computing systems
and differ in power and performance.
Depending on the needs of the solved tasks,
large universal hardware computing systems can be used,
such as mainframes, which are designed for processing large amounts of information.
If some small amount of information is processed,
then such software computing systems as personal computers or PCs can be used for this.
Both servers and clients, i.e. workstations, are used in the network.
The data exchange subsystem includes programs and devices,
i.e. modems, amplifiers, commutators, cables, etc.,
which create a computing network and perform commutation,
routing and access to networks.
Data accumulation subsystems are implemented using banks and databases
on external devices of the computer that manages them.
It is possible to organize both local databases,
which are implemented on individual computers,
and distributed databases,
which are used in the network and distributed data processing.
The information display and knowledge presentation subsystem
is used to form models of the subject area
from its fragments and models of the solved tasks.
At the design stage, the developer usually forms a complex of models of the solved tasks in the memory of the computer.
At the operation stage, the user turns to the information display and knowledge presentation subsystem,
and, based on the task set, chooses the appropriate solution model,
after which other subsystems are included through the data management system.
Finally, the data and knowledge management subsystem.
As a rule, it is partially implemented on the same computers,
that is, on one computer,
on which all other subsystems are implemented,
and partially can be implemented using the systems of organization of the processing process
or using the databases management system.
With large flows of information, special services are created,
the so-called network administrators of databases.
Let's consider the composition and classification of corporate information systems.
Let's turn to the next slide,
which shows the composition of the integrated corporate information system.
Usually, functional and providing subsystems stand out.
Functional subsystems,
corporate information systems or KISS,
informatively serve certain types of economic activities,
that is, enterprises that are characteristic of its structural divisions or functions of management.
For example, accounting, accounting, analysis, economic activities, technical preparation, planning, etc.
The integration of functional subsystems into a single system is achieved
by creating and functioning providing subsystems,
such as information, mathematical, organizational, legal, technical, personnel and other subsystems.
The functional structure of KISS is a complex of economic tasks
with a high degree of information exchanges, that is, connections between these tasks.
The next slide shows some of these tasks,
depending on the level of management.
For example, marketing at the strategic level is some new products and services,
research and development.
At the tactical level, it is analysis and planning of sales volumes.
At the operational level, it is processing of customer orders,
issuing of accounts, deposits, etc.
The composition of functional subsystems is largely determined by the features of the economic system,
its business property, forms of ownership, sizes and character of the enterprise or company.
Functional subsystems are allocated for the implementation of the functions of management,
such as forecasting, norming, planning,
accounting and analysis, regulation, which is implemented at various levels of management
and are combined into relevant management contours, such as marketing, production, logistics, finance.
The subject structure of KISS is a subsystem of management of enterprise resources,
that is, technical preparation of production, main and auxiliary production,
quality of production, logistics, marketing, personnel.
Functional subsystems cover all types of economic activities or business processes of the enterprise,
that is, production, supply, supply, personnel, finance.
Subject subsystems are mainly related to the operational level of management.
As for the supporting subsystems of the corporate information system,
they practically do not depend on the subject area and have their own specific functional structure,
namely, information, mathematical, technical, organizational, personnel and other support.
At the stage of development of the corporate information system,
such supporting subsystems as legal, linguistic, technological and methodological support are attracted.
The slide shows what supporting systems of the corporate information system are.
That is, the object of management is the information system itself,
and the functional structure is information support, mathematical, technical, organizational and personnel.
What is it? Let's briefly go through them.
Information support is a set of means and methods of building an information base.
It consists of information arrays, structured data, documents, incoming, intermediate, outgoing,
as well as rules and methods of subject area classification, coding,
that is, from normative and verification documentation, operational information, some methodological materials.
Mathematical support consists mainly of algorithmic support,
that is, models and algorithms, as well as software support,
that is, what operating systems, what application software is used, and so on.
Technical support is, in fact, computing technology, peripheral devices,
network communications, org technology and some communication tools.
Personnel support is training personnel,
it is methodology, it is a program of courses necessary to maintain the capabilities
and development of the corporate information system.
Organizational support is a set of means and methods of organization, production, management
at the stage of implementation of the corporate information system.
That is, only when we implement KIS.
This includes some industry-leading methodological materials,
typical solutions, design documentation, typical application packages,
general system or industry classifiers, technical and economic tasks and reasons,
technical work projects, regular schedules, and so on.
Legal support is related to the regulation of the creation and operation of the corporate information system.
For example, the regulation of information that is part of the commercial secret.
Each KIS and each enterprise may have its own specific features.
Linguistic support is a set of language tools for successful interaction of various KIS subsystems.
That is, the languages of the sub-BD, the application software, the rules of formalization of the natural language
for compression or disclosure of text information, and so on.
Finally, technological support is a variety of subsystems for processing various types of information
at the stages of their appearance in the life or activity of the corporate information system.
The most interesting for the manager are three information processing systems in KIS.
This is the so-called OLTP, online transaction processing,
in which the corporate information system works with small transactions,
but with a fast-flowing flow, and the client needs the system to respond as quickly as possible.
The analysis should be instantaneous.
An example is the registration of visits to the website.
It is so automated that we do not notice how it happens.
Or the automation of the accounting, storage account, or the account of documents.
All this is done on a flow.
The second type of information processing system, which can also be involved in corporate information systems,
is OLAP, online analytic processing.
This requires a little more time.
This is the analytical processing in real time, or the technology of analytical processing of information,
the essence of which is in the composition of reports and documents, as well as their dynamic publication.
It is usually used by analysts to carry out complex queries on the basis of data,
to prepare business accounts for sales, marketing, and so on.
The third type of information processing system, which is most common in KIS,
is the intellectual analysis of data, or data mining, as it is called in the slang of IT specialists.
This is a process of automatic search for patterns,
that is, the detection of some hidden patterns,
or the interconnection between variables in large arrays of information and data.
It is also used by analysts in the tasks of classification, modeling, and forecasting.
For management practice, the hierarchical distribution of information subsystems by level of management is of significant importance.
This is reflected in the following slides.
In the hierarchy of IT management, we have strategic systems at the top level,
then analytical systems,
then decision-making support systems,
then operational management systems,
automation of business and communications,
and finally, dialogue processing of requests or information infrastructure.
In the level of processing information in corporate information systems,
we distinguish the following IT processes.
That is, the level of processing, which we have considered,
strategic, analytical, decision-making systems, and so on.
We have, let's say, at the strategic level, the input of some aggregate data,
processing, it can be analysis, decision-making, modeling,
and the output may be a solution, strategy, plans.
As a rule, the top management works at the strategic level.
At the analytical level, it is analysts and IT professionals.
The decision-making support system is at the middle level,
where the input is usually used poorly formalized data, analytical models,
but alternative modeling and processing take place,
which are then issued in some reports and analysis results,
and secondary systems are provided above.
It is the complete mixture of such subsystems in corporate information systems
that讓 х requirements of specialized IT systems centrally affect the function of IT.
The completion of such subsystems allows to specialize relevant subsystems
that play a significant role in the functioning of the KIS.
It is the data processing systems that work with iterative processes of processing information
and require very fast processing processes.
Next, information management systems that are oriented at the tactical level of management
from a week to a month.
And finally, third specialized system is the decision-making support systems
that serve the strategic level of management and are associated with the life cycle of the entire corporate information system.
That is, if the corporate information system starts to be poorly indicated,
to form a decision-making badly, its life cycle ends.
It should be noted that the attempts to classify corporate information systems
are quite conditional and are associated with the fact that the determining properties and parameters
of any information system depend on each other.
In fact, from any small information system, we can create an integrated large system
that covers the entire enterprise.
This is evidenced by the development of the history of the business of such companies as HP, Oracle,
SAP, Russian 1S, which began with the automation of accounting,
and now they are already bringing their products to the corporate level and are associated with ERP systems.
Classification from the textbook of Trofimov, dedicated to information technologies in the economy,
can be taken as a basis and used as a guide for choosing from an impressive amount of IT products and solutions
accumulated by the business for some practical meaning and for the practice of management.
According to this textbook, IT is classified in the sphere of operations of the management object,
i.e. industrial enterprises, education, social sphere, banking, credit organizations.
Further, it is a functional classification of the functional structure of information systems,
i.e. automation of technical preparation of production, marketing, enterprise development strategy,
economic planning, finance, material and technical supply, management of personnel, and others.
In terms of organizational structure, IT systems can be distinguished from those systems
that are focused on one automated workplace of the management personnel,
as well as on complexes of interconnected ERPs, i.e. automated workplaces.
Information systems are divided by borders into information systems of enterprises, organizations, industries,
state, and even international information systems, such as the international system of transfers, SWIFT,
which is used by all banks.
In terms of integration, IT systems are classified as local, i.e. the use of isolated information space,
partially integrated information systems, i.e. which have some common information space,
and a fully integrated cooperative information system.
In terms of IT architecture, IT systems are divided into IT systems with centralized architecture and construction,
i.e. one data storage and processing center, or IT systems with distributed architecture,
i.e. computer networks and the presence of many data processing and storage centers.
In terms of specialization, IT systems are classified as IT systems for organizational and economic management,
IT systems for automated training, i.e. e-learning system,
automated management systems of organization resources, i.e. MRP and RP systems,
automated systems for the technological processes of production of products, i.e. ASUTP,
as well as specialized systems such as SAPR, automated design systems for design,
production technology and other products.
Finally, let's consider the last important element of corporate information systems,
i.e. the lifecycle of information systems, i.e. the process of creating an information system,
which is described using the following concepts, i.e. the lifecycle itself, phases, stages, stages,
stages, processes, operations and elements.
The main phases of the lifecycle of any corporate system are the phase of invention, development,
operation and dismantling.
The most important phases are the phase of invention and development,
which are built from the following five stages, as a rule,
i.e. the formation of requirements, development of concepts, technical tasks, technical project and implementation.
The methodology of creating information systems is reflected in the normative documents,
the majority of which have the power of international standards.
Terminology, order, creation and implementation of requirements for parts,
the composition of projects.
The sequence of works related to the determination of the purposefulness of creation and industrial operation of an information system
is defined in the form of a process, i.e. creation or manufacture,
which has a hierarchical description and consists of stages, each of which includes stages,
and they are, in turn, types of work.
That is, such a matryoshka is obtained.
As a fragment, we will consider in more detail the content of the process of creation and implementation of a corporate information system,
which includes the following stages, stages and some types of work.
The stage of forming requirements and development of concepts.
The main purpose of the stages and work of these stages is to form a proposal based on the position of the customer
and to propose the creation of a corporate information system with certain basic functions and technical characteristics.
That is, what functionality is required for a particular customer and what should be the technical basis for this functionality.
The main output documents of this stage are reports and technical and economic justification,
the purposefulness of creating a corporate information system with selected functions and characteristics,
as well as applications for the creation of KIS and the initial technical requirements for a corporate information system
in the corresponding volume, usually to the state.
Further, the stages of technical task and sketch design.
The main purpose of these stages is to confirm the purposefulness and detailed examination of the possibility
of creating an effective information system with functions and technical characteristics
formulated in the form of initial technical requirements for the system.
That is, what is the overall planning of all scientific and technical works,
design and construction works, project installation and installation works,
and the deadlines for their execution, the organization of the executors,
the preparation of all the materials necessary for the project work.
The output documents at this stage are the technical task for the creation of an information system
containing technical requirements and a work schedule plan,
which is agreed upon with the customer and the main executor,
which will be used to implement the corporate information system,
as well as clarification of economic justification and some solutions planned in the technical task,
if necessary.
A scientific and technical report containing the results of pre-project studies
or some kind of sketch project of the information system is also possible.
Further, the stage of technical projects.
The purpose of the work carried out at this stage is to develop the basic technical solutions
for the system being created and to finally determine the cost.
The work of this stage is completed by the development of some general system solutions
necessary and sufficient for the release of operational documentation for the system as a whole,
that is, the project of the death documentation.
Also, at this stage, we have, as a rule, a project of applications for the development of some new technical means.
At this stage, the documentation of special mathematical and technical support is being developed,
including technical tasks for programming.
That is, at this stage, requirements for programmers are being formed.
The main result of the work is the design of a technical project for the corporate information system.
The work documentation is the next stage.
The purpose of the work carried out at this stage is to release the work documentation for the system being created.
The stage is completed by the release of the information system project consisting of the project documentation
necessary and sufficient for the purchase, installation and installation of some sets of hardware and technical means of the system,
as well as the documentation of the program and organizational support necessary and sufficient for the operation of the system as a whole.
And finally, the stage of implementation.
The purpose of this stage and the main result, in fact, is to transfer the operating system into industrial operation,
as well as to obtain some objective, systematized data on the quality of the system,
its current state and the real effect of the system based on the experience of its industrial operation.
For this, the performance of the system as a whole and its individual elements are determined.
The performance of the system as a whole is determined by the technical and economic efficiency of the system,
the functional and algorithmic completeness of the system,
and the social and psychological comfort for the personnel operating the corporate information system.
So, we have considered both information technology and information systems from the stage of creation to the full life cycle,
that is, to the stage of dismantling.
Let's sum up some of the results of the second lecture.
The first thing to pay attention to is that any modern corporate information system includes as components
a set of other specialized information systems designed for certain purposes.
For example, automation of the production process, support for decision-making,
the formation of knowledge of the operating system, and so on.
The second thing is that today information technology is more and more associated with some kind of final set of decisions
on the automation of business processes,
and information systems are more associated with some kind of set of products for the optimization of business processes
and their strategic development.
The third thing to pay attention to is that one of the most important aspects,
which is often omitted from the view of managers when deciding to introduce a particular corporate information system,
is the humiliation of the role of the human factor in favor of the development of some kind of technocratic.
No matter how perfect the software provided by the company or manager,
or how powerful the hardware device or hardware part of the technology may look,
they all have zero value if they are not owned by specialists, employees, that is, staff.
There is an idiom, if you bought something, then you own it.
But if you did not own it, then you do not have it.
This is the situation characteristic of most Russian enterprises,
in which 80% of IT services are aimed at maintaining the resources of computing complexes and software,
while abroad this figure, according to our agency S-News, is only 40%.
That is, the main foreign IT services are not aimed at technology and software,
but at training staff, working with clients, consulting, and so on.
Another moment of truth is laid in the computing complexes themselves.
If you remember the Moore's law, which we talked about at the beginning,
then the voices of experts and specialists are heard more and more often
related to the issue of the ecology of computing.
This increases the concentration of computing power on the decreasing area of the microprocessor.
That is, the density of energy in chips turns them into a small semblance of a nuclear system.
That is, by increasing some software characteristics, we violate other ecological ones.
It is no coincidence that one of the significant characteristics of the so-called data processing centers,
that is, the CODs, is not so much the maintenance of stable energy consumption,
but the amount of energy consumed per unit of computing.
Therefore, in one concept, hardware, software, human, ecological, and other factors can be combined
only under the aegis of some theoretical knowledge, a construct, a concept,
which will help to optimize the use of resources and will allow to achieve business goals in an effective way.
The fifth point is the conditional classification and the difficulties of using the concept of IT systems and IT technology
are due to the nature of the concept of information.
If the information is considered in the context of the process as a whole, then it corresponds more to IT technology.
If the information is considered as an object localized and circulating along the contour of some system,
then the concept of IT system is more suitable here.
So, in the most general form, for a NUSH manager, the IT system is a product of theoretical knowledge
implemented in human, hardware, software, and other resources and technologies,
which allows him to make the optimal choice of solutions for business goals.
IT products allow the manager to cope with the ever-increasing flow of information,
understand and classify his subject area of ​​activity,
extract knowledge and competence from it for the purposes of business processes, and finally just become wiser.
Such a concept of IT technology and IT systems will be useful from another point of view,
namely, today there is a boom in the development of various IT systems and IT technologies.
And it is very difficult to understand their differences, to understand the value for business today.
And since for a certain category of IT specialists and businessmen,
that is, consultants, experts, vendors, distributors, and other IT systems,
IT systems are a source of income,
it is sometimes difficult to determine where the purposefulness of the implementation of a corporate IT system ends for some
and where the marketing of the product for others begins.
Be extremely careful and careful in this.
So, let's illustrate our rather boring, dry lecture based on GOST information,
that is, GOST-based business cases,
related to the activities of the Nevsky Design Bureau.
I liked it because here the data movement on procedures, operations, processes
based on the activities of this enterprise, this bureau, is considered as some kind of through-business processes.
That is, the movement of data, information, for them, is a through-business process.
Therefore, at the enterprise, the most complete, in my opinion, is the task of moving data
both horizontally, that is, between units, and vertically, from the executive to the management and back.
So, the Nevsky Design Bureau, it has existed for about 70 years,
this is our main enterprise for designing, providing documentation, construction, repair, equipment,
re-equipment of our large and complex ocean-based ships.
The information systems used here are the Oracle database information system,
then the CAD design system, based on which a corporate system called Tronics was created.
This is a corporate system of the so-called PLM class,
which provides ERP, CAD, PDM modules and functions.
What is PLM, CAD and PDM?
PLM and CAD can be called from the glossary of the course.
These abbreviations are associated with the life support of both the product and the entire system as a whole.
The main product of the PCB is the design and documentation project,
the overwhelming part of which is text information.
The drawings take up only 30%.
The technology with text documents is integrated with the design technology of the drawing schedule.
The release of all text design documentation,
that is, management of production, accounting, control,
even the definition of standards, labor capacity, design work,
all this is connected with the drawing and is managed with the help of the corporate information system Tronics.
A single database contains calculations, electronic originals, real documents,
and control copies with all changes that came from the customer's factory.
Thus, each document exists in four types.
These are the original data for creation,
then it is like the original, that is, a digital model,
then in the form of a genuine, printed and certified signature,
scanned drawing, which usually goes to the archive,
and some copies with corrected versions.
All project information is stored in a single database,
in accordance with the rights of access to all executors from any workplace.
In fact, the task of creating a single information space has been solved,
so that the data is not only used in the PCB by all departments,
but also transmitted directly to the customer's factory,
and in the future used directly on some onboard systems,
for example, ships, and to ensure its operation.
The Bureau departments do not just communicate with each other,
exchange information, but work in a single information space,
that is, with a single model of the object.
And the bosses have a transparent picture of everything that is happening.
Data exchange is also imposed,
and an interactive relationship with the partners,
that is, with the factories that produce the product,
on the basis of which projects are made.
That is, it distributes work, controls for the execution,
loading of executors, deadlines, reports, and so on.
And also provides specific functions,
which are in such PLM systems,
that is, in Product Life Management.
That is, let's take a closer look at their role.
First, integration with design systems is underway.
That is, if the work is specified as completed,
its result, drawing or text document,
can be viewed directly from the KISS
in the corporate information system,
to anyone who is associated with this product, with this drawing.
Secondly, there is group work.
If the designer needs drawings, for example,
then he orders them to KISS, and they are delivered to his computer,
by email.
That is, in fact, in the system,
the work is placed as if it were in someone's hands.
Of course, there is an interactive interaction module.
And the third is a module for preparing documentation for export.
Since the customers of PKB are foreign companies,
for which translation into English is necessary.
Reporting and any analytics of any complexity
are generated, in fact, in a second.
There is no duplication of paper information at this enterprise.
And it is very difficult to get analytics just like that,
in the form of paper.
For many years, no one has come to work with paper documents on PKB.
The director has his own so-called PC tablet,
with which he does not part, even on business trips.
And he can directly connect to the network from any place
and be able to find everything he needs in the corporate information system.
Reports, some analytical notes,
and any information.
The corporate information system
shows how many resources a person has,
what exactly he asked for to perform certain tasks.
Then you can compare the plan with the fact.
The area of the created documents is evaluated.
In fact, the developed area can be compared with the standards.
The accumulated statistics allows you to set some reasonable standards.
At the same time, you can track how many specific documents
were actually taken from the company.
And how much information was actually taken from the company.
How many specific executors were actually involved
in a particular real object.
That is, what is the real load.
And whether it corresponds to the requested or knocked out by the department head.
KISS also includes a framework management system,
which, among other things,
contains a work time record,
according to the sensors installed on the walkway.
And most importantly,
the fact that the company is informing people on the walkway
allows them to implement the so-called sliding work schedule.
Paper documents, of course,
no one sees them anymore.
And the customer goes to the plant in electronic form.
The genuine front-end communication channel
is the basis for the plant,
allowing you to start doing your work.
The interactive interaction process during group work
All participants in the consent,
discussion of the documentation,
both at the checkpoint and at the plant,
have a connection with it through their workplace.
At the plant, they receive the documentation,
questions arise,
everyone who needs to find out something,
writes a request and sends it to the electronic mail in a special form.
Specialists from the technical support group
either make their own decisions
or attract additional resources to solve this issue.
Or they plan an additional project
to solve it
or to modernize this or that issue.
At any stage,
all managers see the statistics
and the status of all these tasks,
questions that go from the customer to the customer.
All this is recorded in KIS
as additional planned work
and is tested under strict control.
This means that the interaction system
is integrated with the KIS management system.
Let's focus on some specific work with information in PKB.
Data storage on PC users
is strictly prohibited and is prohibited.
It is limited both on hardware and on software.
It is understandable,
because many are tired of working with copies
that have already been changed.
They have a principle
that whoever gave birth to data should introduce it.
The information should be introduced where it is born.
This is the principle of PKB.
Every employee should introduce his own information
and this increases the responsibility for this data.
Finally, one of the most important points.
All the information necessary for other departments
or for accounting should be generated
and sent to the appropriate application.
For example, if an engineer designs a scheme,
he does not need to make a purchase notification for this scheme.
The application itself
should form an additional document
that is already in the application
and is sent to the procurement department.
The engineer just indicates what he needs for the scheme,
and the application itself
works with what the engineer has chosen
and sends it to the material and technical supply department.
To summarize this business case,
one of the most important points
is that the application itself
is not a separate part of the system.
One of the most important points
is that PKB has abandoned the information
of the work of individual persons.
It is important for them to provide information
through the business process.
The KIS should take into account
the feedback and generate business processes.
For example,
if it is impossible to design ventilation,
which is not yet known,
and it usually involves
the contribution of air conditioners,
which produce heat,
then we need to connect these air conditioners
with the ventilation system.
In fact, it turns out a technological chain,
the design of which is established,
that is, it is integrated and automated
by a corporate information system.
It is important that the system has the ability
to support such design chains.
That is, it determines the terms,
costs, and quality of such a technical project.
If the system does everything it can,
but does not generate such business chains
and does not support their solution,
then its activity does not affect the cost.
In short, we got acquainted
with the business processes
and data movements
of various units used in the Nevsky PCB.
We have considered the first part
of our course on IT for managers,
which reflected both the view
of the information society
and the existing theory,
and considered in detail
what information technology
and information systems are.
As a result, I would highlight several points.
The most important is that we need to overcome
the lack of information.
The amount of information is not important
for us, especially for business,
but the quality of information.
Moreover, we must understand
that with such a technocratic view,
we are guaranteed an uncontrollable growth
of unstructured information.
It is time to change.
If we do not take control of the market,
the situation at the enterprise will deteriorate
and they will get stuck in their own information flows.
They will not be able to understand
where the market is, where to develop,
how to develop and what to do next.
Moreover, we now have a very large zoo
of various information technologies
and information systems.
Some of them will significantly improve business,
while others will only interfere.
Therefore, it is important to understand
and feel if an enterprise or a manager,
as the owner of the business process,
cannot or lacks his own knowledge and competence.
He must attract consultants
or vendors or experts
so that they can understand
how information systems
or information technology
can influence the life cycle of his business process.
This is very important.
I hope that the practical skills
you have gained during the two works,
namely, on the assessment of the enterprise
on the subject of creating a knowledge management system
and on the assessment of the enterprise
on the subject of the knowledge management system
and on the assessment of the value of ownership
of the park of computer staff,
will allow you to generate some solutions
related to your business
and will allow you to reach the level
when you make decisions consciously,
not under the influence of some advertising
or marketing program.
Count only on yourself
and be vigilant.
There is a lot of information
that is empty, baseless,
and does not affect the business.
You need to learn to optimize your business processes
based on determining the value of information,
knowledge and competence.
Remember that at the top of the pyramid
of valuable information
is the best business practice.
Thank you for your attention.